The Project Gutenberg EBook of Juutalaisten puolustukseksi, by Emile Zola

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Juutalaisten puolustukseksi

Author: Emile Zola

Translator: E. H.

Release Date: August 23, 2008 [EBook #26403]

Language: Finnish

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JUUTALAISTEN PUOLUSTUKSEKSI ***




Produced by Matti Järvinen.








Juutalaisten puolustukseksi.


Kirjoitti

Emile Zola.


Suomentanut

E[vert]. H[uttunen].


Ensimmäisen kerran julkaissut
Viipurin Työväen Sanomalehti- ja Kirjapaino-Osuuskunta r. l. 1909.




Lukijalle.


Kuten kaikissa n. s. sivistyneissä maissa, samoin Ranskassakin ovat
kansalliskiihkoiset ainekset koettaneet -- vaikkakin huonolla
menestyksellä -- järjestää juutalaisvastaista liikettä
juutalaisajometsästyksineen ja verilöylyineen. Siellä tämä kiihoitus ja
liike kehittyi huippuunsa, suomalaisellekin yleisölle tunnetun,
Dreyfys-jutun yhteydessä, jossa katolinen kirkko antisemistisen liikkeen
ohella kaivoi tasavaltalaisen hallitusmuodon perustuksia. Emile Zola,
joka loistavalla menestyksellä ajoi syyttömän ja sittemmin vallan
syyttömästi tuomitun Dreyfussen asiaa, kirjoitti myös tämän
lentokirjasen "Juutalaisten puolustukseksi" joka, ollen tähdätty
etupäässä katolilaisia antisemiittejä vastaan, kauttaaltaan sisältää
purevaa ivaa yleensä kaikkea antisemiläisyyttä (juutalaisvasta liikettä)
vastaan. Ja koska tämä lentokirjanen puolestaan sopii meikäläisiinkin
oloihin, -- se näet osoittaa lukijalle, miten paljon järjettömyyttä
onkaan siinä raivoisassa vihassa juutalaisia vastaan, jota täällä
erittäinkin n. s. suomettarelaisten taholta levitetään kansan
valistumattomampain kerrosten keskuuteen, -- niin lienee tämä puolestaan
tervetullut lisä tätä kysymystä käsittelevään niukkaan suomenkieliseen
ainehistoon.

      Suomentaja.




Juutalaisten puolustukseksi.


Useitten vuosien, kuluessa olen minä yhä kasvavalla hämmästyksellä ja
inholla seurannut sitä liikettä, jota koetetaan Ranskassa järjestää
juutalaisia vastaan. Minusta tämä näyttää joltakin kauhealta, joltakin
terveen järjen, totuuden ja oikeuden täydelliseltä yli äyräittensä
menolta, joltakin sokealta ja järjettömältä, joka heittää meidät useita
vuosisatoja taapäin kauhistuksen hirveimpään aikakauteen, uskonnollisiin
vainoihin, joka saattoi kastella armaan maan verellä... Ja minä tahdon
tämän sanoa. Mistä oikeastaan nuhdellaan juutalaisia, mikä on itsessään
syy tähän loppumattomaan riitaan?

Useat, jopa minun erityiset ystäväni, ilmaisevat, etteivät he voi sietää
juutalaisia ja etteivät he ilman inhon tuntoa asemassaan voi koskettaa
käteenkään juutalaista. Tämä fyysillinen vastenmielisyys, tämä rotuviha
on valkoisten puolesta ruskeaihoisia ja punaisien puolesta mustaihoisia
vastaan. Minä en tahdo tutkia miten paljon tässä tunteessa tässä
vuosisataisessa ylenkatseessa ja kostossa on vaikuttavana tekijänä
kristityn viha juutalaisia vastaan siitä, että tämä ristiinnaulitsi
hänen Jumalansa. Fyysillinen inho loppujen lopussa on varsinainen syy,
paljon mahdollista, myös erityinen varsinainen syy, siihen nähden, mitä
ihmiset lausuvat meille ilmaistessaan ajatustaan: "minä vihaan heitä sen
tähden, että minä heitä vihaan, sen tähden, että heidän nenänsä muoto
karkoittaa minua heistä, sen tähden, että yksi ainoa ajatus heistä
saattaa vereni kuohuksiin, sillä siinä määrässä olemme me kaikessa
eroavia ja vastakkaisia toisillemme"...

Eikä siis sitä vähemmän rotuvihaa voida pitää kostonhaluisten ihmisten
vihan syynä ja puolustuksena. Jos tämä on siis niin, niin minkätähden
emme sitten palaisi takaisin metsän syvyyksiin ja ryhtyisi uudelleen
raakalaissotaan yhden rodun puolelta toista vastaan! Alkakaamme syödä
toinen toisiamme sen tähden, ettemme samalla tavalla huuda, sen tähden,
että naapurimme tukka ei kasva samoin kuin meidän. Mitä varten sitten
sivistyksen ponnistuksia, jos me emme kerran voi hillitä metsäläisen
vaistoa, joka yllyttää hyökkäämään meitä lähimpämme kimppuun, jos tämä
lähimmäisemme ei ole kaikin puolin meidän mieleemme. Kansojen historia
vuosisatojen kuluessa on opetusta molemminpuolisesta suvaitsevaisuudesta
ja lopullinen ihmisyyden päämäärä on yleismaailmallinen veljeys, joka
liittää kansat yhteen ja rakkaus, joka ponnistelee pelastaakseen
ihmisiä. Vihata, pureksia ... sen tähden, että tuon pääkallo ei ole
vallan samallainen kuin minun... Ja tämä nyt!... Meidän aikanamme!...
Mutta eikö tämä ole hirveätä järjettömyyttä?

Tulen nyt pääsyytteeseen niin sanoen sen sosialiseen luonteeseen.
Valaisen pääkohdissaan syytöksien sisältöä. Juutalaiset muodostavat
kansallisuuden kansallisuuksien kesken; he elävät erityisenä
uskonnollisena luokkana ja tällä tavoin, ollen vailla maantieteellisiä
ja politisia rajoja, omistamatta isänmaata, muodostavat jotain
kansainvälisen lahkon tapaista, joka jonain kauniina päivänä laskee koko
maailman valtansa alle. Juutalaiset menevät avioliittoon omiensa kanssa,
suojelevat nykyisen irstailun aikana lujan perhe-siteen, tukevat ja
rohkaisevat toinen toisiaan, sekä ilmaisevat eristetyssä tilassaan
suuremmoista vastustuskykyä ja voimaa ja hitaasti, mutta kuitenkin
varmasti valloittavat kaiken ja laskevat sen valtansa alaiseksi.

Juutalaisten suku on erinomaisesti käytännöllinen ja järkevä. Voiton
halu ja himo rahan perään on heillä veressä; heidän hämmästyttävä
toimelias älynsä auttoi heitä vähemmän, kuin sadan vuoden kuluessa
käsiinsä keskittämät suunnattomat rikkaudet toimien niitten kanssa
aikanamme, jolloin rahat ovat kuninkuus ja valta.

Myöntäkäämme, että tämä kaikki on oikein. Mutta vakuuttaakseen
tosiasioita, tulee niitä vähän vielä selittää.

On tarpeellista lisätä, että juutalaiset, sellaisina millaisina heitä
kuvaavat syyttäjänsä -- ovat ainoastaan tulos meidän käsistämme, hedelmä
18-vuosisadan järjettömästä vainosta. Ihmisiä ajettiin inhottaviin
kaupungin osiin, kuten spitaalitautisia... Mitä ihmettelemistä siis
siinä, että he alkoivat elää erikseen, säilyttäen perittyjä tapojaan,
vahvistaen perhesuhteitaan ja jääden voitetuiksi keskellä voittajia.
Heitä lyötiin ja solvaistiin kaikkialla ja he huokasivat
oikeudettomuudesta ja väkivallasta. Mitä ihmeellistä siinä on, että he,
myöskin ymmärtämättömästi säilyttävät sydämessään toivoa kaukaiseen
kostoon, päätökseen seista vihollisiaan vastassa ja voittaa heidät.
Heille halveksivasti annettiin rahan yhteiskunnassa kaikki ylenkatse ja
yhteiskunnassa asetettiin heidät kauppiaan ja koronkiskurien asemaan.
Mutta kun raan voiman aikakausi vaihtui järjen ja työn aikakaudeksi ja
juutalaiset vuosisatain kuluessa tapahtuneen aivojensa perinnöllisen
hienostumisen ja karaistumisen kautta osottautuivat täydellisesti
valmiiksi ja kypsyneiksi pääoman herroiksi ja valtijoiksi, niin --
kaikki suuttuivat ja kirkuivat.

Te vapisette pelosta nähdessänne, että teitte juutalaisesta
keskiaikaisen uskonlahkolaisen, mutta omassa sokeassa vihassanne, te
ette ymmärtäneet ajatella mitään parempaa kuin palata tuhannen vuotta
taapäin, teille mieluisesti vastaan otettuun uskonnollisten vainojen
kauteen. Te aloitte kehoittaa pyhään sotaan: juutalaisia tulee
metsästää, ryöstää, heitä tulee kuten ennenkin tunkea yhteen kuoppaan,
todennäköisesti sitä varten, että he henkensä raivolla uudelleen
tuntisivat, että he ovat ahdistettu kansa, keskellä ahdistajia! Ei
mitään sanomista, te olette mainioita poikia, järkeviä ja tärkein, te
erinomaisesti ymmärrätte mistä on kysymys säännöllisissä
yhteiskunnallisissa oloissa....

Ja itse asiassa! teitä katolilaisia on enemmän kuin kaksisataamiljoonaa
ja juutalaisia tuskin viittä miljoonaa, -- ja te vapisette, te kutsutte
santarmeja, te kohotatte vaikeroimisen ja painitte aivan kuin suuri
ryövärisotajoukko olisi hyökännyt teidän isänmaahanne. Millainen
merkillinen rohkeus ja urhoollisuus! Minun käsittääkseni taistelu
juutalaisten kanssa on aivan, aivan mahdollista. Tätä varten on yksi
täydellisesti varma keino. Olkaa yhtä järkeviä ja toimeliaita, kuin
hekin. Muistan miten minun täytyi kokonainen kuukausi kuljeskella
pörssissä, päästäkseni jollakin tavoin selville tästä minulle niin
kummallisesta alasta. Eräs katolilainen pankkiiri usein minulle puhui:
"ah, he ovat meitä voimakkaammat, he aina meitä lyövät." Jos tämä on
oikein, niin totta eikö tämä ole alentavaa. Mutta onko se niin?
Luontaiset taipumukset epäilemättä merkitsevät paljon, mutta järki ja
työ voittaa kaikki. Minä itse tunnen kristittyjä, joita voi pitää
erinomaisina juutalaisina. Kenttä on vapaa. Jos he vuosisatojen kuluessa
ovat opetelleet rakastamaan ja toimimaan rahoineen, seuratkaa heitä
tällä tiellä, koettakaa omata heidän luonnettaan, niin voitatte heidät
heidän omalla etevyydellään sen sijaan, että hyödyttömästi aina solvata
heitä. Muuta ei ole, -- tämä on elämän laki.

Kuinka heillä onkaan syytä ylpeillä, kun he kuulevat teidän epätoivoiset
huutonne! Olla merkitsemättömänä vähemmistönä ja kuitenkin aiheuttaa
sellaista pelkoa! Kourallista ihmisiä vastaan kaivataan miltei
kokonainen varasto kaikkein hirmuisimpia sota-aseita. Joka aamu te
suuntaatte heitä vastaan huutonne ja lyötte hätäkelloa, aivan kuin
kaupunki olisi vihollisten piirittämä! Kuullessa teitä pitäisi muodostaa
rajoitettu ala, rakentaa uudelleen juutalaisten katu, joka yöksi
suljettaisiin ketjuilla. Sangen kauniin näyn muodostaisi tällainen kuva,
meidän avonaisissa, vapaissa kaupungeissamme. Minä ymmärrän, että
juutalaiset eivät kiihottuisi vaan jatkaisivat rauhallisesti juhlaansa
meidän finanssimarkkinoillamme. Haukkuminenhan on se pyhimystaruinen
nuoli, joka aina kilpistyy takasin ja lävistää metsästäjän silmän.
Ahdistakaa heitä enemmän, niin he voimakkaammin tulevat teitä
kurittamaan.

Niin vainoaminen! sanokaapa olkaa hyvä! pidättekö te kaikki vielä tästä
nautinnosta? Te vielä yksinkertaisesti uskotte, että ihmisiä voidaan
hävittää vainoamalla? Mutta tämähän juuri johtaa päinvastaiseen.
Jokainen suuri asia ainoastaan on lisääntynyt ja kasvanut kun se on
kostutettu marttyyrien verellä. Jos juutalaiset ovat olemassa on se
teidän vikanne. He olisivat jo aikoja sitten hävinneet, sulaneet suureen
ihmispaljouteen, jos teidän ajometsästyksenne ei olisi pakoittanut heitä
taipumaan ja itsepäisesti jäämään rotukokonaisuudeksi, kuin erityiseksi
vakuudeksi ominaisesta olemassaolostaan. Ja nykyisin, kaikki heidän
voimansa lähtee teistä, te sitä lisäätte ja he vasten tahtoaan näyttävät
niin voimakkailta. Tarvitsee vain huutaa vaarasta joka päivä, niin vaara
ilmenee. Näyttäen kansalle vain pelotinta voi siitä muodostaa hirviön.
Kun juutalainen tulee meille olemaan samasta merkityksestä kuin me itse,
niin hän on silloin veljemme. Tämä on erinomaisen järkevä menettelytapa.
Meidän täytyy laajaksi avata sylimme ja toteuttaa teossa sosialinen
laissa julistettu yhdenarvoisuus. Tuntea juutalaisia omikseen, rikastua
heidän luonteenominaisuuksillaan -- ne ovat heillä -- pysäyttää ja
ehkäistä rotutaistelu ja suosia seka-avioliittoja... Siinä suuremmoinen
ihmisyyden, yhdistymisen ja vapautuksen tehtävä.

Juutalaisvaino niissä valtioissa, joissa se näyttelee huomattavaa osaa,
aina ilmenee, joko politisen puolueen taisteluaseena tai tuloksena
raskaasta taloudellisesta asemasta.

Mutta Ranskassa, jossa juutalaiset eivät ollenkaan ole rajattomasti
pääomaa hallitsevia, kuten siitä tahdotaan meitä uskotella,
juutalaisvihamielisen liikkeen ilmeneminen on täydellisesti
perusteetonta, omaamatta minkäänlaisia juuria kansan keskuudessa. Tämä
ei ole edes liike, vaan surullinen räiske muutamista, katolisen
lahkolaisuuden arveluttavista tyhjistä fraaseista. Uskotella vakavasti,
että nykyiset juutalaiset Rotschildiin asti ovat sen Judaan
rintaperillisiä, joka antoi ylön ja ristiinnaulitsi meidän Jumalamme,
tämä on jo sanomalehdistöltä suoranaista väärinkäyttöä. Ja minä uudistan
välttämättömyydestä meluisalla areenalla, että halu herättää huomiota,
ja saada itselleen yleisöä -- siinä pääsyy meidän juutalaisvihamielisen
liikkeemme sytyttäjiin, tämän kansan kiihotukseen, jonka liekki,
onneksi, olikin liioteltua.

Mutta siitä huolimatta millainen kauhea vieremä romahdus! Useitten
kuukausien aikana, joka päivä purkaa herjauksia, teroittaa syytöksiä ja
kirkua: juutalaiset ovat varkaita, juutalaiset ovat murhaajia -- syytää
juutalaisille kristittyjen vikoja, joihin sitten halusta heitetään varjo
-- kuinka te uskallatte vastustaa?! Siis te olette juutalainen! Kaikki
juutalaiset, kaikki täytyy metsästää, kaikkia solvaista ja mestata!.. Ja
mitä oli tämän raivon seurauksena? Vähäpätöinen hälinä, rivoja sanoja,
asetettuna alhaisten intohimojen nähtäviin, ja ... vaikkapa edes yksi
päättävä "toimenpide" -- vaikkapa edes joukkio "raivoavaa yleisöä". Ei
mitään! ei yhtään halkaistua pääkalloa, ei yhtään rikottua akkunaa.
Täytyy joka tapauksessa olla tällaisen hyvän, kunniallisen ja järkevän
kansan, kuin meidän herttainen Ranskan kansa on, jotta pidättäytyy
antautumasta tähän joka päivä kutsuttuun kansalaissotaan ja
säilyttääkseen terveen järjen keskellä alituisesti hämmästeleviä
ihmissyöjiä, jotka ahnehtivat juutalaisten verta! Ei kauvan sitten kuin
eräille lehdille mieluisena palana oli pappi. Nyt he aamuruuakseen
valitsevat juutalaisen. Oleellisesti tämä niin viheliäinen ruokalaji,
kuten edellinenkin, mutta pienemmässä mitassa, niin perin tyhmä.
Kaikesta tästä jää jäljille tuskin likaista, hävettävää ja järjetöntä
teon tuntomerkkiä. Eipä edes katuliike palaa katsella töllistelemään
näihin pirun riivaamiin, saattaen heidät kiistelemään, kuten pirut
pyhässä vesiastiassa. Kummallisinta kaikista on tämä heidän
valittelunsa. He uskottelevat, että tekevät jotakin välttämätöntä ja
terveellistä. Onnettomat ihmiset! Kuinka minun on sääli heitä, jos he
ovat vilpittömiä. Hirmuista ajatella, millaisia asiakirjoja he
pidättävät itselleen! Joka päivä, vapaaehtoisesti erityisine käsineen
kasata valheitten joukkoa, erehdyksiä, raivoisaa vihaa ja rajua
järjettömyyttä! Mikä voisi olla surullisempaa? Kun aikojen kuluessa
tutkiva tieteilijä ajattelee laskeutua tähän suohon, hän tulee
liikutetuksi saadessaan varmuuden siitä, että siellä pimeydessä ei ollut
muuta, kuin uskonnollisia intohimoja ja rikkiväännettyjä aivoja.
Historia lyö häpeäpaaluun näitten raivoisain huutajien, näitten
sosialisten rikoksentekijäin nimet, joitten ilkityöt eivät onnistuneet
sen tähden, että he koettivat sovelluttaa niitä täydelliseen järjen
pimittämiseen.

Minä en lakkaa ihmettelemästä, että tällainen palaaminen kiihkoiluun,
tällainen yritys kehoittaa uskonnolliseen sotaan, saattoi ilmetä meidän
aikakaudellamme, meidän suuressa Parisissa, keskellä hyväntahtoista
kansaamme. Tämä on erityisesti käsittämätöntä nyt yleisen
suvaitsevaisuuden kansanvaltaisena aikana, jolloin kaikkialla huomataan
pyrkimystä tasa-arvoisuuteen, veljeyteen ja oikeuteen.

Ei koskaan luultavasti niin kiihkeästi haaveiltu siitä, että rajat
häviäisivät ja kaikki kansat yhdistyisivät. Me näemme, miten eri
uskontunnustuksiin kuuluvat hengelliset käyvät yhdessä uskonnollisissa
kongresseissa; paremmat ajatukset opettavat meille, että kaikki ihmiset
ovat taisteluveljiä toisilleen, että meidän velvollisuutemme on auttaa
toinen toisiamme kantamaan elämän koetuksia ja että korkein alttari on
se, johon kannetaan ihmisten sääliväisyyden rukouksia. Mutta äkkiä
kourallinen tylsämielisiä, järjettömiä eli keinottelijoita alkavat
raivoisasti parkua: kuolema juutalaisille, lyökää juutalaisia,
kuristakaa niitä, hävittäkää ne sukupuuttoon, sytyttäkää polttoroviot ja
palatkaa ihmiskunnan alkuvaiheisiin. Siinä on, josta voidaan sanoa, että
se on hyvin valittu seikka. Ah, kaikki, tämä olisi tyhmää, ellei se
olisi niin kauheata.

Että muutamien juutalaisten käsiin on kerääntynyt liian paljon pääomia,
se on tosiasia. Juuri samanlainen kokoontuminenhan on ominaista myös
katolilaisilla ja protestanteilla. Mutta lisätä kansan harmia, tehdä se
uskonnollisten intohimojen aseeksi, heittää juutalainen pulaan
joutuneitten onnettomien ihmisten vihan sovitusuhriksi, sillä
tekosyyllä, että jokainen juutalainen on kapitalisti -- millaista väärää
ja ulkokullattua sosialismia tämä on. Sitä ei saa kruunata, vaan se
täytyy paljastaa. Jos tulee päivä, jolloin työnlaki järjestyy
muotoihinsa eli luo oikeutta ja onnea, -- se päivä toteuttaa ihmisyyden.
Silloin katoaa eroitus juutalaisen ja kristityn välillä, silloin
vaaditaan kaikilta samanlaista tilinvelvollisuutta, mutta senpä tähden
oikeudet ja velvollisuudet tulevatkin olemaan kaikille samanlaiset.

Ihmisten yhteisyys! Oi, kuinka välttämätöntä on tähän uskoa, jotta omata
rohkeutta elää, jotta suojella edes jonkinlaista toivoa taistelussa.
Ihmisten yhteisyys! Nämät sanat kaikuvat tuskin kuuluvalla äänellä,
mutta vähäkerrassaan se tulee voimakkaammaksi ja kuten voittoisa huuto,
kaikuu kaikille kansoille, jotka janoavat totuutta, oikeutta ja rauhaa.

Pois viha, ryhtykäämme rakastamaan toinen toisiamme kaupungeissa,
kylissä ja rajojen ulkopuolellakin; ryhtykäämme työskentelemään
saattaaksemme kaikki rodut yhdeksi onnelliseksi perheeksi. Vaatikoon
tämä vaikka tuhatta vuotta, me kuitenkin tahdomme uskoa lopulliseen
rakkauden voittoon, me myöskin uskomme, että myös meidänkin aikanamme
täydelleen voimme alkaa rakastaa lähimpiämme. Mutta ne vähämieliset
hullut, jotka uskovat, että oikeutta voidaan jakaa veitsen iskuilla, --
antaa niitten palata takaisin keskiajan raakalaiskauden synkkään
metsään. Ja sanokoon Jesus intoileville oppinsa seuraajille, että hän on
antanut juutalaisille anteeksi ja että hekin ovat ihmisiä...






End of Project Gutenberg's Juutalaisten puolustukseksi, by Emile Zola

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JUUTALAISTEN PUOLUSTUKSEKSI ***

***** This file should be named 26403-8.txt or 26403-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/4/0/26403/

Produced by Matti Järvinen.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
